.TH ALTIRRAQT 1 "2026-05-01" "altirraqt" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
altirraqt \- Qt port of the Altirra Atari 8-bit emulator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B altirraqt
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fIimage\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B altirraqt
emulates the Atari 800, 800XL, 130XE and 5200 home computers.  It is a
Qt port of Avery Lee's Altirra; the upstream Win32 GUI is replaced
with Qt 6 widgets and a QOpenGLWidget-backed video display, while the
core emulator (CPU, ANTIC, GTIA, POKEY, disk / cassette / cartridge
peripherals) is the unmodified upstream code.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help on commandline options.
.TP
.B \-\-help-all
Display help including Qt-specific options.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information.
.TP
.BI \-\-kernel " file"
Path to an Atari kernel ROM (Atari 800 OS-A/OS-B, Atari 800XL OS,
etc.). Overrides the bundled AltirraOS for the current hardware mode.
.TP
.BI \-\-basic " file"
Path to an Atari BASIC ROM. Overrides the bundled Altirra BASIC.
.TP
.BI \-\-image " file"
Mount
.I file
as a disk / cassette / cartridge — the auto-detect figures out which
from the contents.
.TP
.BI \-\-type " text"
Synthesise a sequence of key presses (each character of
.IR text )
into the running emulator after a one-second startup pause. Useful
for headless smoke-testing keyboard input.
.TP
.BI \-\-screenshot " seconds:path"
After
.I seconds
of run time, save a screenshot of the display widget to
.IR path ,
then quit.
.TP
.BI \-\-soak " frames:path"
Run for
.I frames
frames with audio output muted, take a SHA-256 hash of the final
framebuffer, write the hex digest to
.IR path ,
and exit. Used for CI determinism gating.
.TP
.BI \-\-save\-state\-at " seconds:path"
After
.IR seconds ,
save the current emulator state to
.IR path .
.TP
.BI \-\-load\-state " file"
Load
.I file
as a save state at startup (after kernel ROMs are registered, before
ColdReset).
.TP
.BI \-\-save\-state\-roundtrip " path"
Save state, load it back, save again, and compare the two saved blobs
byte-for-byte. Exits 0 on match, 1 on mismatch. Used as a CI gate for
state-format stability.
.SH KEYBOARD
.TS
l l.
F1	Pulse Warp (held)
F2	Console Start
F3	Console Select
F4	Console Option
F5	Warm Reset; Shift+F5: Cold Reset
F6	Help (Atari OS scancode)
F7	Save State; Shift+F7: Load State
F8	Warp Speed toggle
F9	Pause
F11	Quick Save / Full Screen
F12	Capture Mouse
Ctrl+Q	Exit
.TE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/Altirra Qt port/altirraqt.conf
QSettings — persisted display, audio, system, profile, joystick,
and per-image settings.
.SH AUTHOR
Avery Lee (upstream Altirra) and Ben Booth (Qt port).
.SH SEE ALSO
.UR https://www.virtualdub.org/altirra.html
Upstream Altirra
.UE
